---
title: 'Makers, by Cory Doctorow'
date: '16-10-2019 14:56'
taxonomy:
    tag:
        - making
        - literature
hero_classes: 'parallax text-light overlay-dark hero-fullscreen'
hero_image: makers-US-cover-large.jpg
show_sidebar: false
feed:
    limit: 10
---

*I said a couple times: there are (at least) two books called 'Makers'. People usually read the wrong one, one trying to promote a 'new industrial revolution' even before we solved the many problems generated by the previous ones.*

**Makers, a novel - available [here](https://craphound.com/makers/about/):**

> Perry and Lester invent things—seashell robots that make toast, Boogie Woogie Elmo dolls that drive cars. They also invent entirely new economic systems, like the “New Work,” a New Deal for the technological era. Barefoot bankers cross the nation, microinvesting in high-tech communal mini-startups like Perry and Lester’s. Together, they transform the country, and Andrea Fleeks, a journo-turned-blogger, is there to document it.
> Then it slides into collapse. The New Work bust puts the dot.combomb to shame. Perry and Lester build a network of interactive rides in abandoned Wal-Marts across the land. As their rides, which commemorate the New Work’s glory days, gain in popularity, a rogue Disney executive grows jealous, and convinces the police that Perry and Lester’s 3D printers are being used to run off AK-47s.
> Hordes of goths descend on the shantytown built by the New Workers, joining the cult. Lawsuits multiply as venture capitalists take on a new investment strategy: backing litigation against companies like Disney. Lester and Perry’s friendship falls to pieces when Lester gets the ‘fatkins’ treatment, turning him into a sybaritic gigolo.
> Then things get really interesting.
