# Log - 16.03.2021

Just updated the notes about my session at mozfest.

This week I expect to organise the future sessions. I am thinking of an open studio format, with regular meetings for say four weeks, documenting on GitHub and hopefully forming a working group (how? e-mail list?) around tech for reuse. Still trying to decide whether I'll have all the sessions at the same day and time each week, or else taking turns to include people on different timezones or different levels of availability.
